

Cyber Sunrise Over Addis Ababa
             by
        Daniel Yacob

There has been and there shall be lots of talk about all that's available from
the coming Internet.  Readers of this week's issue are already familiar with
what's to come -so lets turn our attention then to how we can start, even now,
exploring this world within worlds.

Access to Internet services in Addis Ababa is available to anyone with three
essential ingredients:  1) A computer  2) A Modem (to use a computer over
telephone lines) 3) A telephone.  With this a person may contact by telephone
(51-45-34) the PADIS computer bulletin board known as "The Hornet".  From the
Hornet a person would retrieve by computer two final ingredients:  A web
browser (your "car" for driving on the information super highway), and the
"winsock" communications software (to make your computer think the phone line
is an Internet line).  Those who contact the Hornet will find step-by-step
instructions for how to proceed.

With the web browser ("Netscape" is the most well known) the Internet explorer
(called a "surfer") would call back to the Hornet.  From the Hornet the surfer
will be able to view 3 World Wide Web services and retrieve new software by FTP.

FTP is a file transmission and retrieval system for sending and receive items
like software between computers on the Internet.  Following Email, the World 
Wide Web, or just "web" or "WWW", is the greatest utility that the Internet 
provides.  With Email a person composing a document is required to mail it to
each person he or she wishes to read it.  With WWW the document is never sent
to anyone, the document may remain on the composer's computer and anyone
wishing to read it is welcome to come (electronically) and do so.  This saves
a lot of trouble when there might be thousands or millions of people who may
wish to read!

Navigating the Internet through the web is a lot like reading a big electronic
magazine.  You will view in your web browser pages of text and pictures
(sometimes sounds and movies but less often) that you can read at your leisure.
Turning pages will then be done through the keyboard or by the computer "mouse".
Only now when you change pages you may also have changed computers.  The new
computer that you read the next page from may be located around the world.  The
magazine reader may not even realize that they have change to another computer
on the other side of the planet.  This is the "magic of the Internet" and of the
"cyberspace" we have journeyed through by changing pages and computers.  At its
best, distance loses its relevance in cyberspace.  All going well, flipping 
between computers (like flipping pages) is as fast and invisible to the surfer
as working on their own computer in the comforts of their home.

The Web is often used interchangeably with the term "Internet" though this is a
misnomer.  The two are quite different.  The Internet is merely a network that
connects networks of computers.  Physically it is a collection of cables and
open satellite links.  This is much the same as our "world wide" telephone
network only that we are ultimately connecting computers and not telephones.
The Web is then a service we can use over this network.  Voice communication is
one type of service people use on the telephone network, but sending and 
receiving faxes is another kind of service we can use on the same network.
The Web is just one of many services we can use the Internet for.

So what do you see when one computer calls another over Internet?  Web surfers
in Addis Ababa who call The Hornet will have three web services available to
them. As you might expect the ECA web pages are available to the public.  Also
the UN Emergencies Unit for Ethiopia is "on line".  Finally the "Ethiopia On
Line" web service is a popular location.

Ethiopia On Line is a web server for non-UN materials.  There you will find
such interesting sites as "The Addis Ababa Home Page",  "The Ethiopian
Scientific Society Home Page" , "The Abyssinia Cyberspace Gateway", "The Addis
Tribune Home Page" and the ESS 1996 Telecom Conference proceedings.  Coming
soon will be Microsoft's very own "Mungo Park" adventure magazine which has been
tracking the Tekeze River Expidition -previously unaccessible within Ethiopia.
By the way, a "Home Page" if we have not mentioned it is an organization's 
self presentation to the Internet community -like a fancy brochure explaining
what an organization is about or what products a company might sell.

Even without installing the special web browsing software on your home PC, 
the ECA web services are accessible with the limitation of "text only" 
viewing -meaning no pictures can be transmitted.


Is This Really The Internet?

In a word:- "no".  Visitors to the ECA's web sites will experience the services
of the Internet but only from the computers within the ECA compound.  The ECA
will not be able to provide access to the outside Internet -only the ETA will
have the authority to do so.  However, new materials from the outside Internet
will be downloaded and made available to the Ethiopian surfer from with the ECA
compound.  This limited glimpse of the truly "World Wide'' Internet should
still be enjoyable to the average user.

The same procedures and software will be used through the ETA service when it
becomes available.  The main difference being the telephone number you will
call and the unlimited number of web sites available.  These external web sites
may also be downloaded by ECA and ETA email subscribers through "Agora" web
servers that will retrieve and email back the web sites you request.  This is
the best approach for people wanting to view web in the outside world without
the added cost of a full internet subscription.  Visit The Hornet for a list of
Agora web-by-email addresses.


It's Better to Give Than Receive

Not only can you read Internet materials at The Hornet -you may also publish!
The Hornet has always been the community's public electronic communications
area in Ethiopia.  This spirit and service continues with the latest form of
electronic communication -the World Wide Web.  The Ethiopia On Line web service
is available to organizations, companies and the interested to publish WWW
materials for the public to browse and enjoy.  Materials published at Ethiopia
On Line will also be available to the surfers outside of Ethiopia.

The Addis Tribune has for two months lead the way of Ethiopian companies in
this latest communications frontier.  All are invited to come see what the
Addis Tribune has done to present Ethiopia to the world and to follow their
lead in bringing Ethiopia to the Internet!
